                                    Supplementary Note:
    Positive Recurrence for Single-Linkage Bimolecular
     Weakly Reversible Stochastic Reaction Networks
                                                  Alec Kriebel
                                              Independent researcher
                                           ORCID: 0009-0001-9320-500X

                                Supplementary Note — 22 August 2026

                                                     Abstract
         This supplementary note collects edge-case clariﬁcations and reproducibility interfaces supporting the
      main manuscript. The ﬁnite-trace and embedded-chain-to-continuous-time propositions, including their
      proofs, remain in the main manuscript.


1     Trace-chain and physical-time details
1.1    Labelled-channel marking
The augmented state records the target of the actual labelled channel that ﬁred. If two channels have the
same population displacement but diﬀerent sources or targets, their post-jump populations can agree while
their carried targets or transition probabilities diﬀer. They therefore remain separate. Only channels with
identical source and target may be aggregated.

1.2    Nonemptiness of the Foster set
The ﬁnite set K in the episode-drift construction is nonempty, not merely ﬁnite. The global-minimum
argument is pathwise: the residual log-factorial potential has a global minimum, and every possible episode
endpoint has potential at least that minimum. No optional-stopping or integrability claim is needed at this
step because every episode has uniformly bounded ﬁnite length.

1.3    Hitting versus positive return
The trace-chain proof distinguishes ﬁrst hitting from positive return. From k ∈ K, one ordinary jump
is taken before the next hit of K, so the resulting return time is positive. There are only ﬁnitely many
successors of states in K, and the endpoint-chain drift estimate gives ﬁnite expected hitting of K from each
successor. The ﬁnite trace chain is considered only after this step. A uniform ﬁnite-block chance of reaching
one selected trace state gives ﬁnite expected positive trace return; the random trace excursions are then
expanded into ordinary embedded jumps using the strong Markov property and Tonelli’s theorem.

1.4    Stationary occupation balance
The return construction gives a ﬁnite expected number of embedded jumps and a ﬁnite expected amount
of physical time before the positive return to the selected state x∗ . During a complete return cycle, the
number of arrivals at any state y ̸= x∗ equals the number of departures from y pathwise. At x∗ the
initial departure and terminal arrival also balance. Taking expectations and weighting each visit by its
exponential holding-time mean gives the statewise stationary balance equations for the normalized mean


                                                         1
occupation measure displayed in the manuscript. This is the elementary cycle-level interface behind the
cited regenerative occupation theorem.

1.5    Nonexplosion in physical time
The population embedded chain is constructed before nonexplosion is known. The ﬁnite-mean return result
for that embedded chain supplies a population state x∗ visited inﬁnitely often. At each visit, the following
holding time has the same exponential law with one ﬁxed ﬁnite rate. The strong Markov construction makes
these holding times independent copies, and their inﬁnite sum diverges almost surely. Total physical time
dominates this subseries, so jump times cannot accumulate at a ﬁnite time. This recovers nonexplosion for
the present subclass; broader bimolecular weakly reversible nonexplosion is already known, as cited in the
main manuscript. Once nonexplosion is established, the uniform positive lower bound on total rates and the
ﬁnite mean embedded return give ﬁnite expected physical return by Tonelli’s theorem.

1.6    Absorbing singletons
Absorbing singleton reachability classes are handled before channel augmentation and carry their point-
mass stationary laws. In a nonabsorbing irreducible class every population state enables a genuine channel;
otherwise that state would itself be absorbing, and symmetry of accessibility would force its reachability
class to be the singleton.


2     Computational veriﬁcation boundary
The accompanying dependency-free Python package performs deterministic, exact-arithmetic checks of the
falling-factorial identity and source-probability rewrite. It also tests state-cycle lifting and accessibility
symmetry on ﬁnite calibration networks, scalar-envelope branch conditions and monotonicity, the bimolecular
top-complex classiﬁcation with certiﬁcate-validated witnesses, absorbing-singleton handling, the corrected
κ2 ↓ 0 rate-example limit, the exact logarithmic coeﬃcient, the exact Anderson–Cappelletti–Kim Example 4.1
comparison included in the paper, and the stationary return-cycle normalization on a ﬁnite chain.
   The reproducer runs the complete test suite, emits the canonical report twice, requires those reports to
be byte-identical, and compares the result with the committed report. Environment information is recorded
separately so that it does not destabilize the canonical JSON. The canonical report is veriﬁed on CPython
3.11 through 3.14; no claim is made for future interpreter versions until they are added to the test matrix.
   These computations are falsiﬁcation and regression aids. No ﬁnite atlas proves the universal theorem, no
random test proves recurrence, and no computation enumerates the analytic Foster set K or certiﬁes a useful
bound on its cardinality, location, or diameter. Those universal conclusions come only from the manuscript’s
analytic argument.


3     Reproduction pointers
From the tagged Version 1.2.4 release directory, run:

cd code
./reproduce.sh

   The canonical output is code/verification_report.json; an identical durable copy is retained
as supplement/verification_report.json. The reproducibility environment, release identiﬁers, and
complete clean-checkout replay procedure are recorded in REPRODUCIBILITY.env and validation/; the
release manifest is supplement/MANIFEST.sha256. The package archive is created deterministically by
supplement/build_release_archive.py and checked byte-for-byte in continuous integration.




                                                        2
