                                            REAL AND COMPLEX SUPERSOLVABLE LINE ARRANGEMENTS
                                                         IN THE PROJECTIVE PLANE

                                                                KRISHNA HANUMANTHU AND BRIAN HARBOURNE




arXiv:1907.07712v1 [math.AG] 17 Jul 2019
                                                  Abstract. We study supersolvable line arrangements in P2 over the reals and over
                                                  the complex numbers, as the ﬁrst step toward a combinatorial classiﬁcation. Our main
                                                  results show that a nontrivial (i.e., not a pencil or near pencil) complex line arrangement
                                                  cannot have more than 4 modular points, and if all of the crossing points of a complex
                                                  line arrangement have multiplicity 3 or 4, then the arrangement must have 0 modular
                                                  points (i.e., it cannot be supersolvable). This provides at least a little evidence for our
                                                  conjecture that every nontrivial complex supersolvable line arrangement has at least
                                                  one point of multiplicity 2, which in turn is a step toward the much stronger conjecture
                                                  of Anzis and Tohǎneanu that every nontrivial complex supersolvable line arrangement
                                                  with s lines has at least s/2 points of multiplicity 2.




                                                                                   1. Introduction
                                              Line arrangements have provided useful insight in studying a range of recent problems
                                           in algebraic geometry. They have played a fundamental role in studying the containment
                                           problem (see [8, 7]), for the bounded negativity problem and H-constants [2], and for
                                           unexpected curves [4, 5]. The supersolvable arrangements are a particularly tractable
                                           subclass of line arrangements which have played a role in the study of unexpected curves
                                           [4, 5]. Understanding them better should make them even more useful. Thus the goal
                                           of the present paper is to pin down as much as currently possible properties of real and
                                           complex supersolvable line arrangements.
                                              A line arrangement is simply a ﬁnite set of s > 1 distinct lines L = {L1 , . . . , Ls } in
                                           the projective plane. A modular point for L is a crossing point p (i.e., a point where
                                           two (or more) of the lines meet), with the additional property that whenever q is any
                                           other crossing point, then the line through p and q is Li for some i. Then we say L is
                                           supersolvable if it has a modular point (see Figure 1).
                                              If the s lines of L are concurrent (i.e., all meet at a point), then L is supersolvable.
                                           Such an arrangement is called a pencil. If L consists of s lines, exactly s − 1 of which
                                           are concurrent, it is called a near pencil; near pencils are also supersolvable, since every
                                           crossing point for a near pencil is modular. Removing any line, diﬀerent from the line
                                           through two white dots, from the arrangement shown in Figure 1 results in a near pencil.
                                              We refer to the number of lines of an arrangement containing a point as the multiplicity
                                           of the point. So crossing points always have multiplicity at least 2. The modular points in

                                              Date: July 15, 2019.
                                              The ﬁrst author was partially supported by a grant from Infosys Foundation and by DST SERB
                                           MATRICS grant MTR/2017/000243. The second author was partially supported by Simons Foundation
                                           grant #524858. We also thank Ş. Tohǎneanu for some helpful comments.
                                                                                              1
2                    KRISHNA HANUMANTHU AND BRIAN HARBOURNE




       Figure 1. A supersolvable line arrangement with 2 modular points
       (shown as white dots).



Figure 1 have multiplicity 3, while the other crossing points in the ﬁgure have multiplicity
2. For k ≥ 2, we will use tk to denote the number of crossing points of multiplicity k.
   For example, a pencil of s lines has a unique modular point (indeed, a unique crossing
point) and it has multiplicity s, so ts = 1 and otherwise tk = 0. A near pencil of s lines
has s modular points; when s > 3, s − 1 of the s modular points have multiplicity 2
(so t2 = s − 1) and one has multiplicity s − 1 (so ts−1 = 1), while if s = 3 all the three
modular points have multiplicity 2 (so t2 = 3). We will refer to pencils and near pencils
as trivial.
   It is an open problem to determine which t vectors (t2 , . . . , ts ) can arise for real or
complex line arrangements, even for supersolvable line arrangements. It is even an open
problem to classify all complex line arrangements with t2 = 0, even for the supersolvable
case. It is known that no nontrivial real line arrangement can have t2 = 0. Three
nontrivial kinds of complex line arrangements are known with t2 = 0 but there is no
proof that there are no others. No nontrivial supersolvable complex line arrangements
are known with t2 = 0, but again no proof is known that there are none even though it is
expected that t2 is large. (In [1] it is conjectured that a nontrivial complex supersolvable
arrangement of s lines has t2 ≥ s/2.)
   We will address these questions for real and for complex supersolvable line arrange-
ments. Our main results are Theorem 6, which shows that a nontrivial complex line
arrangement cannot have more than 4 modular points, and Theorem 17, which shows
that if all of the crossing points of a complex line arrangement have multiplicity 3 or
4, then the arrangement must have 0 modular points (i.e., it cannot be supersolvable).
This provides at least a little evidence for our Conjecture 11 that every nontrivial com-
plex supersolvable line arrangement has at least one crossing point of multiplicity 2,
and also supports Conjecture 12 [1] that there are in fact at least s/2 crossing points of
multiplicity 2, where s is the number of lines in the arrangement.
   The structure of the paper is as follows. In Section 2 we recall facts we will use
later. In Section 3 we study the classiﬁcation of supersolvable real and complex line
arrangements, and prove Theorem 6. In Section 4 we consider various conjectures related
to the occurrence of points of multiplicity 2 on real and complex line arrangements (such
as Conjectures 11 and 12), and we prove Theorem 17. Finally, in Section 5, we discuss
the application of supersolvable line arrangements to the occurrence of unexpected plane
curves, and raise the question of whether all which can occur are already known.
                           SUPERSOLVABLE LINE ARRANGEMENTS                                    3

                                     2. Preliminaries
  Let L = {L1 , . . . , Ls } be a line arrangement in the projective plane over an arbitrary
ﬁeld K. In this section we include some well-known results that we use in this paper.
  Recall that, for every k ≥ 2, tk denotes the number of crossing points of multiplicity
k. Let n denote the number of all crossing points. Let m be the largest integer k such
that tk > 0.
  First we have the following combinatorial identity which holds for any ﬁeld K.
                                          X 
                                         s          k
                                             =         tk .                            (2.1)
                                         2     k≥2
                                                    2
  If K = C and L is nontrivial, we have the following inequality due to Hirzebruch [9].
                                    3         X
                                t2 + t3 ≥ s +   tk (k − 4).                              (2.2)
                                    4
                                                k>4
  If K = R and L is not a pencil, we have the following inequality due to Melchior [11].
                                         X
                                t2 ≥ 3 +    (k − 3)tk .                           (2.3)
                                             k≥3
   When char(K) = 0 and L is supersolvable, we have the following inequality proved in
[1, Proposition 3.1].
                                 t2 ≥ 2n − m(s − m) − 2.                         (2.4)
   The following result is [12, Lemma 2.1]. For the reader’s convenience we include a
proof.
Lemma 1. Let L be a supersolvable line arrangement (over any field K) with a modular
point p of multiplicity m. If q is a crossing point of multiplicity n ≥ m, then q is also
modular.
Proof. In addition to the line L = Lp1 = Lq1 through p and q, L contains m − 1 lines
through p (denote them by Lp2 , . . . , Lpm ) and n − 1 lines through q (denote them by
Lq2 , . . . , Lqn ). Let rij be the point where Lpi intersects Lqj . Suppose A and B are any
two distinct lines in L. Let r be the point where A and B meet. We must show r is on
a line in L through q. If either A or B contain q, then r is on a line in L through q, so
assume neither A nor B contains q.
   First say n > m. Let aj be the point where A and Lqj meet. Since q 6= aj , we get
n − 1 distinct points aj , each of which is on some line Lpij since p is modular. But there
are only m − 1 < n − 1 lines Lpi , so we must have ij = ij ′ for some j 6= j ′ , and hence
A = Lpij = Lpij′ , so p ∈ A. Likewise p ∈ B, so r = p ∈ L is on a line in L through q.
(This also shows that n > m implies that every line in L contains either p or q; i.e., the
lines in L are the m + n − 1 lines through p and q.)
   Now say n = m. If both A and B contain p, then r = p ∈ L is on a line in L through
q. So assume either A or B does not contain p; say p 6∈ A. But p is modular, so the
point r where A and B meet is on Lpi′ for some i′ . Again, let aj be the point where A
and Lqj meet. Since q 6= aj , we get n − 1 distinct points aj , each of which is on some
line Lpij since p is modular. If ij = ij ′ for some j 6= j ′ , then A = Lpij = Lpij′ , so p ∈ A
4                      KRISHNA HANUMANTHU AND BRIAN HARBOURNE

contrary to assumption. Hence ij 6= ij ′ whenever j 6= j ′ , the n − 1 = m − 1 values of
j > 1 map under j 7→ ij to all m − 1 = n − 1 values of i > 1, hence for some j ′ we have
i′ = ij ′ , so A meets Lpi′ at aj ′ = rij′ j ′ = ri′ j ′ ∈ Lpi′ . But A meets Lpi′ at r ∈ Lpi′ , so
r = aj ′ ∈ Lqj ′ , so r is on a line in L through q. Thus q is modular.                          

                3. Classifying supersolvable line arrangements
3.1. Supersolvable line arrangements with modular points of multiplicity 2.
We ﬁrst classify all line arrangements, over any ﬁeld K, having one or more modular
points of multiplicity 2, or two (or more) modular points, not all of the same multiplicity.
Thus, after this section, we may assume all modular points have the same multiplicity,
which is at least 3.
   As a corollary of the proof of Lemma 1, we have the following result, which classiﬁes
line arrangements where at least two multiplicities occur as multiplicities of modular
points.
Corollary 2. Let L be a supersolvable line arrangement (over any field K) with a mod-
ular point p of multiplicity m. If q is a crossing point of multiplicity n > m, then L
consists exactly of the m lines through p and the n lines through q (hence m + n − 1 lines
altogether). If m = 2, then every crossing point is modular and L is a near pencil. If
m > 2, then the only modular points are p and q.
Proof. We saw in the proof of Lemma 1 that the lines in L are the m + n − 1 lines
through p and q. If m = 2, the only lines are the m lines through q (one of which
goes through p) and the remaining line through p, hence L is a near pencil. If m > 2,
there are (n − 1)(m − 1) crossing points of multiplicity 2, but a point of multiplicity 2
on one line through q is connected to at most one point of multiplicity 2 on any other
line through q, and hence no point of multiplicity 2 is modular. I.e., the only modular
crossing points are p and q.                                                           
Proposition 3. Let L be a line arrangement (over any field) having one or more modular
points, exactly one of which has multiplicity 2 (call this point p). Then L is the pencil
consisting of the two lines through p.
Proof. If L had a crossing point of multiplicity n > m = 2, then by Corollary 2, L is
a near pencil, and thus would have n points of multiplicity 2. Thus L has exactly one
crossing point, and it has multiplicity 2, so L is the pencil consisting of the two lines
through p.                                                                             
Proposition 4. Let L be a line arrangement (over any field) having two or more modular
points, at least two of which have multiplicity 2. Then L is a near pencil.
Proof. Let p and q be modular points of multiplicity 2. Since L is supersolvable, given a
crossing point other than p, the line from p to that point is in L. But p has multiplicity 2,
so every crossing point must be on one or the other of the two lines through p. Likewise,
every crossing point must be on one or the other of the two lines through q.
  Let L be the line through both p and q; thus L ∈ L. Let Lp be the other line in L
through p and let Lq be the other line in L through q. Let r be the point where Lp and
Lq meet. Thus any crossing point not on L must be on both Lp and Lq ; i.e., r is the
