3272                                                      Oberwolfach Report 53/2019

Workshop activities consisted of ﬁfteen half hour talks in the mornings, with every
participant being given the opportunity to speak if they desired. On the ﬁrst day
there were additionally two problem sessions where suggestions of problems for
groups to work on were made. We divided ourselves into three groups which
worked together on research problems in the afternoon sessions. We now discuss
the problems studied and progress made by each of these working groups.

Line arrangements and Seshadri constants. Let (X, L) be a smooth polar-
ized surface. The multi-point Seshadri constant of L at x1 , . . . , xr is deﬁned to
be
                                                         L·C
                   ε := ε(L; x1 , . . . , xr ) = inf P              ,
                                                  C    i multxi (C)
where the inﬁmum is taken over reduced and irreducible curves C which pass
through at least one of the points xi .
   The study of multi-point Seshadri constants is already interesting for points
in the projective plane P2 . A famous conjecture of Nagata [10]         √ asserts that if
r ≥ 10 and x1 , . . . , xr ∈ P2 are suﬃciently general, then ε = 1/ r. On the other
hand, when the points x1 , . . . , xr lie in special position, the constant ε is frequently
rational, and it is a very interesting problem to compute it. This problem often
requires a great deal of understanding of the position of the points.
   In this group we focused on the case where the collection of points is the set
of singular points in a line conﬁguration in the plane P2 . In this case there is a
natural guess as to what the Seshadri constant ε should be: one of the lines in
the conﬁguration should compute the constant. This was recently conjectured by
Pokora.
Conjecture ([11]). Let x1 , . . . , xr ⊂ P2 be the set of singular points in a con-
figuration of lines. If k is the maximum number of points which lie on a line,
then
                                                       1
                               ε(L; x1 , . . . , xr ) = .
                                                       k
   We discovered a method to study this conjecture via a linear programming
problem; this allowed us to solve the conjecture so long as the number of lines in
the conﬁguration is at most 12. However, in the case of 12 lines, the very special
line conﬁguration known as the dual Hesse conﬁguration requires an essentially
diﬀerent method to solve. Work on this problem continues.

Global generation and nef divisors on self-products of curves. This group
started by thinking about the following problem:
Problem. Does there exist a smooth complex projective surface S and a sequence
of ample line bundles (Ln ) on S such that setting
                               
                 ν(Ln ) = min m L⊗m  n   is globally generated ,
we have ν(Ln ) → ∞ as n → ∞?
